If your teacher points to something round and says ‘glog’ five or six times, can you then come to know what ‘glog’ means?

I have adopted Wittgenstein’s style of presenting a series of problems and answering them to tackle above problem. The essay consists of two parts. In the first part, I talk about the situation where the student and teacher experience the lack of language-game. #1 provides the possible account of the teacher, based on which this essay will begin. #2 dismisses any success in linguistic communication where the two play different formal language-game #3 highlights unspoken portion in the language-game. #4 argues that it is impossible to teach the student anything if he does not have the vocabulary, whether that vocabulary is that pertaining to linguistic or non-linguistic portion. #5 describes ostensive teaching when the teacher and student both are masters of language-game. From #5, I argue in #6 that reacting to glog and drawing a circle is not associated with the understanding of roundness. This is because the meaning is not stuck to the words we use. Therefore, we cannot say that the use of words to summon the essence of the word, for it is but an illusion.

By observing cultural notions, I conclude in the second part that language-game is unique in each case of communication, but also similar to others. This is described in Philosophical Investigation via the analogy of family resemblance. In #7, I show that ostensive teaching does not let the teacher decide how the student pairs the meaning with interpretation, unless he relies on the cultural convention that sets out rules of the language-game. However from #8, I observe that syntax and semantic are independent, and meaning has no place in grammatical correctness that teacher exercises in #7. #9 introduces the notion of cultural convention that sets up the standard correctness in a language-game. Such cultural convention can be nurtured, and #10 exemplifies this. Not only can it be nurtured, a language-game can be freely mutated, and be made somewhat private between two speakers. This is demonstrated through #11. #12 explains that the unboundedness of specific form of a language-game is similar to that of family resemblance. #13 serves as a conclusion. Meaning is private, and a language-game is the best approximation we use to express it. Finally, below are two things I would like to warn the reader; first, I use two word pairs, ‘vocabulary’ & ‘syntax’ and ‘meaning’ & ‘semantic’ interchangeably; second, throughout the essay, I made an assumption that the roundness (whatever that word may mean to the teacher) is what he wants to convey from this teaching.

1.	The student knows he is in an ostensive learning session, I point to the round circle drawn on a blackboard, and say ‘glog’ several times. I test him on this association of ‘glog’ and the circle later. If he draws a circle upon hearing ‘glog’, I will confirm that he knows what ‘glog’ means. 

2.	If the student is unfamiliar with the language game the teacher plays, what the teacher utters is nothing but gibberish to the student, just as this essay written in 汉字may not make sense to the reader. 

3.	Suppose a doctor uses his finger to point out the mother to a newly born. The doctor resorts to finger pointing, because the newly born does not speak English. But why would the doctor assume that the baby knows how to understand the finger – just because it is not spoken out? He is wrong. If one imagines a person without any language game, one should not only remove the formal language that we utter, write, read and listen to, but also the informal portion of communication. Body language is as much a part of our holistic language as formal language. There is no reason, if you are outside the language-game of finger pointing, that the finger should attract your eyes. In the baby’s mind, the usage is yet to be attached to the gesture, and he will need to go through more examples of the usage to catch-on. The student is also foreign to informal language of the teacher. 

4.	If the student does not have any vocabulary the teacher intends to use for the method #1, the teacher may first need to explain the usage of the finger, how to choose the thing that’s being pointed from nearby candidates, etc. But to teach these things, the teacher must express the instruction. If the student does not have the vocabulary necessary to understand the instruction, he will not understand the pointing finger, either. This is an example of regress that we encounter, when we explain the capacity to communicate via accumulation of vocabulary from ostensive teaching. Vocabulary stands on more fundamental vocabulary, and we cannot get to the bottom of it.  

5.	Let’s now supposed that the student plays the language game of the teacher. This includes unspoken portion, such as pointing to indicate things, or staring that demands attention. Ostensive teaching requires some medium to exemplify ideas such as roundness. For instance, if the round thing is drawn on a blackboard with a chalk, the teacher is not to expect the student to understand that it is the roundness that she points to, as opposed to all the distractions: blackboard, chalk, respective colors, or brokenness of the circle. There is no way to present single idea out of all the distractions. With words and motions, the teacher cannot help the student. It is the student who singlehandedly succeeds in focusing on the indicated thing, as opposed to all distractions. 

6.	Ostensive teaching deceives us to actually convey meaning, because we are so accustomed to such assumption. This is because both the student and the teacher are masters of language-game, where conventional meaning to words are established in a sense that they have used the words enough times to predict the outcome of use. However, suppose that the teacher successfully has the student demonstrate that upon the sound ‘glog’ he draws out a circle. But the teacher may not say he understands the meaning of the novel word ‘glog’. In order to be sure that he is not merely reacting to the stimulus (i.e. the utterance of ‘glog’), the student must demonstrate roundness, not just an ability to draw a circle, upon hearing the word ‘glog’. Drawing a circle is an insufficient proof of the understanding of roundness. There is no obvious connection between the utterance ‘glog’, and the student’s understanding of roundness. If he understands, replying with some demonstration of roundness is a matter of understanding the signal. (e.g. 원을 그리시오 ) Drawing out a circle is only one manifestation of the understanding.

7.	Suppose the teacher gives a ball as the thing to be described. The teacher expects glog to be the right answer. We suppose that along with glog, the student learned other words. If glog fits as the description of the ball than anything else, the student is pigeonholed to give the correct answer. But imagine a case where another word learnt was ‘mlog’, which substitutes the word ellipse in English. The teacher ostensively taught mlog with a rugby ball. It is conceivable that the student may prefer to say mlog upon seeing a ball, because of its similarity as a ball. Can we say that the student is wrong, that he prioritized the similarity of being a ball over that of being round? This deviant student may say, “that seemed natural to me.” He has the right to be confused, because the pointing finger alone is not capable of conveying the perfect indication of a mentioned thing. The teacher can then only say “well, that is confusing! Because that is not how you use ‘mlog’.” But why might the teacher assume that it is the student who caused the confusion? His authority lies in the experience of having played the language-game. He is sure that the word mlog is not used as such, and feels that he has the right to assert such usage. 

8.	Suppose the student, after repeated correction and demonstration, learns to draw a circle when he hears the word ‘glog’. Now, the teacher might ask the student; is that glass ‘glog’? The teacher may hold the glass to have its bottom pointed to the student that its shape looks most similar to the circle drawn on a blackboard. The student replies, ‘Yes it is, and I can go on pointing things that are round.’ After this, the student may also call a beer bottle ‘glog’. But in this experience, the word glog does not play any role, because the student’s realization of the idea of roundness applied to a cylindrical object is independent of the teacher’s utterance, for it could have been any other utterance, in any language-game. 

9.	Student says, “This bottle is glog, too!” We can imagine that it was actually a noun, but the teacher happened to have phrased it in a grammatically incorrect way. Is she wrong? If she is, her mistake is a grammatical one. The teacher can easily correct this by saying, “No, you should say ‘a bottle’s shape is a glog.’” What just happened is an interpretation of an idea “glog” as a noun form in the English language-game. The way in which an idea is expressed in a particular language-game can change, but the meaning does not change. Language-game has a set of syntactic rules, but getting it wrong does not mean that person’s semantic was wrong, because both the teacher and student understand despite the syntactic mistake. Syntax and semantic are independent of each other. Language-game confuses us, and their constituents seem attached to each other.

10.	The cultural convention is what gives the teacher authority to correct the student. If the student finds himself in South Korea, the word glog would, when spoken to an average Korean, not mean a thing to the Korean speaker. However, if the Korean is also familiar with English language-game, she will catch-on. She’d observe how it is used, try using it (perhaps incorrectly), and after a few nudging into right direction, she’d understand that glog is the noun form of the roundness it points to. She might, on the next day, begin to use it as if its usage had been natural to her all along. She might say that she now has a new word that she can use to indicate its syntactic counterpart in Korean, or the idea of roundness itself. In both cases, she did not just learn the concept of roundness.

11.	The Korean could use the word glog in a grammatically wrong way, or she, having mistaken that she understands, invents the use of the word on her own. Perhaps in her native language-game, the notion of being circular and that of having curvature are referred to with the same Chinese character phonetic. Suppose she calls everything with any curvature “gloggy”. She has invented a new word, or a novel usage of the word glog, that is now a member of the language-game that is between herself and the student. One would say that it is a temporary mutation of the English language-game. This previous sentence is only valid if the person believes that English language-game exists as its own entity. The student may come to understand what the Korean means when she says ‘gloggy’. He’ll see that all her use of the word is associated with the curvature, and catch-on to the incorrect usage. At least in Korea, what makes this Korean’s usage wrong is the student’s notion of correct English. Yet, to the Korean who experiences unrestrained English conversation, “gloggy” is as legitimate a word as a “glog”. She may go on to think, “sure, it is true that the word gloggy is not in the dictionary, but I can teach other Americans that I have to talk with, as to use gloggy in just the same way I did with this American.” Cultural convention is nothing more than this process of deciding on the usage, and abiding by it. Here, gloggy has become a cultural convention between the two speakers. 

12.	The student goes back to the United States, and continues to use the word gloggy. Yet, he is aware of the English language-game. So instead of referring to everything with the curvature, he feels it more correct to limit the use of the adjective to describe roundness, and uses it as such. Since words are nothing more than boxes that may contain anything, he may let the box ‘gloggy’ play whatever role he may see fit. But in the new language-game, he may not put something that has another box, namely ‘curvature’ box. 

Yet, the student feels that the conversations he’s had in Korea and America were not restrained by the use of the word gloggy. The student may feel that the usage of the word gloggy developed between him and the Korean was incorrect. He belongs to the language-game of fellow Americans around him now. However, the student also would remember that the word gloggy seemed to have been right when he put himself in the language-game between the two. 

This reminds us of the analogy of family resemblance in Philosophical Investigations. I share some similarities with my brother, and my parents. Compared to two readers of this essay, on average, I resemble more to a Korean person picked out in random street in Korea. Let us apply this analogy to language-game. English is a meta-language-game, a race. It is a foundation of language-games its speakers participate in. They are similar to one another, yet also distinct: just as our appearances exhibit some similarities and differences. This is possible because the nuances are only grammatical. The communication is impossible when one party lacks the meaning. On the other hand, if both parties lack meaning, it will never be talked about.

13.	If you make a brake-lever designed for the whole system of the engine of which you have in mind while you make the lever, you know the brake-lever is what you want, with respect to the envisioned engine. However, once you forget the rest of the engine, the brake-lever can be anything and nothing. The brake-lever still seems ‘right’ that it occupies space and time, is tangible, etc., but it loses contact with the private sensation that imagined the engine, thereby it is also nothing.

Above can qualify the success of the ostensive teaching. When the teacher utters “glog”, what does the student conceive the “rest of the engine” to be, that glog belongs to? Also, the student, from this day on, has the word ‘glog’ at his disposal, and starts to use it. Ten years later, is the context in which he utters the glog (the rest of the engine if you will) the same as that he develops after the teacher repeats glog five or six times? In ten years, the student would have experienced more cases in which glog be used, or its poetic usage, its usage in other countries, and so on. Independently, his understanding, what ‘glog’ means to him would also have experienced changes. The changing usage may or may not change the meaning it conveys to the user. Ten years later, the student’s private sensation upon having heard “glog” may not be the same as the sixth time he had heard it from the teacher.  Yet this is of no importance to the teacher, as his objective from the beginning was to get the meaning across that he would never have to find out that the student’s understanding of glog is different from his own. The teacher will have correctly taught the student, only until the student expresses his original conception of glog that differs from that of the teacher’s.